---
id: 4947cda2-d17d-4289-ab37-1f4f64bfa1d4
blueprint: page
title: 'Upgrade from 3.2 to 3.3'
intro: 'A guide for upgrading from 3.2 to 3.3'
template: page
---
## Overview

First read through this guide to see if there's anything that you might need to adjust.
When upgrading, Statamic may automate some things for you. They'll be noted below.

In your `composer.json`, change the `statamic/cms` requirement:

```json
"statamic/cms": "3.3.*"
```

Then run:

``` shell
composer update statamic/cms --with-dependencies
```

## Changes

### High impact changes
- [PHP >=7.4 required](#php-version)

### Medium impact changes
- [Entries fieldtype augments to query builders](#entries-fieldtype)

### Low impact changes
- [New Antlers Parser](#antlers)
- [Date field's time_required setting has been removed](#date-time-required)
- [v-calendar upgraded to v2](#v-calendar)


## PHP >=7.4 required {#php-version}

Statamic 3.3 now requires at least PHP 7.4.

If you're running a lower version, we recommend upgrading all the way to 8.1.


## Entries fieldtype augments to query builders {#entries-fieldtype}

The `entries` fieldtype would previously augment to an `EntryCollection` of `Entry` objects. In 3.3, they will augment to a query builder.

### In Antlers

If you were adding modifiers to your loop, you'll need to apply them to an inner aliased loop.

Before:

```
{{ related_posts modifier="param" }}
  ...
{{ /related_posts }}
```

After:

```
{{ related_posts as="whatever" }}
  {{ whatever modifier="param" }}
    ...
  {{ /whatever }}
{{ /related_posts }}
```

### In PHP

If you're using them in PHP, you'll need to add a `->get()` to grab the entries from the query before continuing.

Before:

```php
$relatedPosts->someCollectionMethod(...);
```

After:

```php
$relatedPosts->get()->someCollectionMethod(...);
```

## New Experimental Antlers Parser {#antlers}

3.3 includes an overhauled Antlers parser. It fixes many issues with the existing parser and brings many new features.

By upgrading to 3.3 **you will not automatically get the new parser**.

If you'd like to use the new parser, [read about it in the docs](/new-antlers-parser), where it explains the experimental nature and how to use it.


## Date field's time_required setting has been removed {#date-time-required}

The `time_required` option has been removed from the `date` fieldtype.
The `time_enabled` setting still exists, and we suggest you use that.


## v-calendar upgraded to v2 {#v-calendar}

If you were relying on the [v-calendar](https://github.com/nathanreyes/v-calendar) package within the Control Panel, be aware that it has been upgraded to v2.
