---
id: a1d1a50e-fb42-4a9e-b03f-59dc47f21dc2
blueprint: page
title: 'Upgrade from 3.3 to 3.4'
intro: 'A guide for upgrading from 3.3 to 3.4. For most sites, the process will take less than 5 minutes.'
template: page
---
## Overview

First read through this guide to see if there's anything that you might need to adjust. When upgrading, Statamic may automate some things for you. They'll be noted below.

In your `composer.json`, change the `statamic/cms` requirement:

```json
"statamic/cms": "3.4.*"
```

Then run:

``` shell
composer update statamic/cms --with-dependencies
```

## High impact changes

### The runtime Antlers parser is the default

In 3.3 we introduced a new Antlers parser but you had to opt into it.

In 3.4 it becomes the default.

You may continue to use the old "regex" parser, but you'll need to make sure to specify that in `config/statamic/antlers.php`.

```php
'version' => 'regex', // or "runtime" for the new parser
```

### Draft entries no longer get added to search indexes

In 3.3 drafts would be indexed, in 3.4 they are not.

This change was really more of a bug fix, but if you *wanted* drafts to be indexed, you can create a filter that just allows everything.

```php
// config/statamic/search.php
'myindex' => [
    'driver' => 'local',
    'searchables' => 'all',
    'filter' => fn () => true, // [tl! ++]
]
```

## Medium impact changes

### Term queries return all localizations

**This will not affect any native tags, like `taxonomy`.** It will only affect you if you are performing term queries in PHP, such as:

```php
Term::all();
Term::query()->get();
```

In 3.3, these would deduplicate the terms and only give you a single localization. i.e. If you had 2 sites configured, and 3 terms, you'd end up with 3 results.

In 3.4, you will get all the localizations. i.e. You would get 6 results.

To get the previous behavior (even though it was buggy, and the reason for the change), you can query for a specific site:

```php
$query = Term::query();
$query->where('site', 'english'); // [tl! ++]
$terms = $query->get();
```

### Search queries return Result classes
**This will not affect the `search:results` tag.** This would only affect you if you were performing searches manually in PHP. Depending on what you were doing with the results, it's possible no changes would be necessary anyway.

Search queries now return `Result` instances. Previously they returned instances of the actual searchable items. (e.g. an Entry)

You can continue to get the underlying classes by mapping using the `toSearchable()` method.

```php
$results = Search::index('default')->search('foo')->get();
$results = $results->map->getSearchable(); // [tl!++]
```

## Low impact changes

### Slugs no longer include extra characters

In some forms, the slug will get automatically generated. e.g. When you type into the `title` field on a publish form.

In 3.3, some special characters would get converted. e.g. The `&` would become `and`.

In 3.4, **these characters will not get converted**.

To enable these character conversions, you can enable a new setting in `config/statamic/system.php`.

```php
'ascii_replace_extra_symbols' => true,
```

### Replicator, Bard, and Grid IDs

All three fieldtypes will now supply their `id` to templates. Previously the, the `id` would have been the entry's ID.

If you still need to access the entry's ID within the field tag pair, you may use the `page` variable:

```
{{ grid }}
    {{ id }} the entry id {{# [tl! --] #}}
    {{ id }} the grid item's id {{# [tl! ++] #}}
    {{ page:id }} the entry id {{# [tl! ++] #}}
{{ /grid }}
```

### LocalizedTerm reference now includes site handle

The `reference` method of the `LocalizedTerm` class now includes the site handle, even when only a single site is configured.

```yaml
term::categories::hats # [tl! --]
term::categories::hats::en # [tl! ++]
```

### Entries etc must implement Searchable

The `Entry`, `LocalizedTerm`, `Asset`, and `User` classes must implement the `Searchable` interface.

If you've customized any of these classes, you'll need to make sure to implement the appropriate methods. If you are extending from the native classes, then you probably don't need to make any changes.

### Custom search index drivers accept locale

This only affects users that have created custom search index drivers.

Now that search indexes can be localized, when they are constructed, a nullable `$locale` string will be passed to it. You should make sure that the name includes it.

```php
Search::extend('custom', function ($app, $config, $name, $locale) {
    return new CustomDriver(
        $config,
        $name,
        $locale // [tl!++]
    );
});
```

If you are extending the native Statamic `Index` class, this will be done for you.

## Zero impact changes

These are items that you can completely ignore. They are suggestions on how to improve your code using newly added features.

### Utility and Permission registration

3.4 fixes an issue where translations for utilities and permissions may not have been displayed in the right language when a user has a custom locale preference.

The core utilities and preferences were fixed, however in order to fix it for addons, you will need to wrap your existing code in closures.

```php
Permission::extend(function () { // [tl! ++]
    Permission::register('foo', '...');
}); // [tl! ++]

Utility::extend(function () { // [tl! ++]
    Utility::make('foo')->register();
}); // [tl! ++]
```

### Utility fluent methods

The utility class was updated to be consistent with permissions syntax. You no longer need to chain `register` to the end. You can simply use `register` at the start instead of `make`.

```php
Utility::make('foo')->title('Foo')->etc()->register(); // [tl! --]
Utility::register('foo')->title('Foo')->etc(); // [tl! ++]
```
