---
id: 9a013ab0-bd21-42e1-84ea-fecd052466e9
blueprint: page
title: 'Upgrade from 5 to 6'
intro: 'A guide for upgrading from 5 to 6. For most sites (those running Laravel > 10), the process will take less than 5 minutes.'
template: page
---
## Overview

First read through this guide to see if there's anything that you might need to adjust. While there are many items on this page, a majority of them only apply to addons or custom code. We've noted who each item would apply to so you can more easily scan through the changes.

### Upgrade using Composer

In your `composer.json`, change the `statamic/cms` requirement:

```json
"statamic/cms": "^5.0" // [tl!--]
"statamic/cms": "^6.0" // [tl!++]
```

Then run:

``` shell
composer update statamic/cms --with-dependencies
```

## High impact changes

### PHP and Laravel support
**Affects apps using PHP < 8.2 or Laravel < 11.**

- The minimum version of PHP is now 8.2.
- The minimum version of Laravel is now 11.

We highly recommend upgrading all the way to Laravel 12 and PHP 8.4.

:::tip
If you want to (semi-)automate the Laravel upgrade process, we recommend using [Laravel Shift](https://laravelshift.com/discounts/statamic-1983) (use that link for a special 19.83% discount 🤘).
:::

### Vue 3
**Affects apps or addons that use Vue.**

We have upgraded the Control Panel's version of Vue.js from 2 to 3.

To keep this upgrade guide manageable, we have a [dedicated page for upgrading from Vue 2 to Vue 3](/upgrade-guide/vue-2-to-3).

If you do not have any custom Vue components in your app, or in your own addons, you can skip this.

### Timezones
**Affects apps using dated collections or date fields**

**If your `timezone` setting in `config/app.php` is set to `UTC`, then nothing will change for you.**

Dates remain stored in your application's timezone. But now Statamic will convert them to UTC at runtime, which makes it much easier for Statamic to localize them as needed.

This applies to dated entries or date fields.

For example, if you have your timezone set to New York (GMT-5:00) and you have a date at 10pm, when it gets converted to UTC it will be 5 hours ahead - in the next day!

```php
// config/app.php
'timezone' => 'America/New_York',
```
```yaml
# an-entry.md
my_date_field: '2025-03-06 22:00'
```
```php
$entry->my_date_field;
// 5.x: Carbon { 2025-03-06 22:00 America/New_York } [tl! --]
// 6.x: Carbon { 2025-03-07 03:00 UTC } [tl! ++]
```

::tabs
::tab antlers
```antlers
{{ my_date_field | iso_format('JJJJ') }}
5.x: Thursday, March 6, 2025 10:00 PM {{# [tl! --] #}}
6.x: Friday, March 7, 2025 3:00 AM {{# [tl! ++] #}}
```
::tab blade
```blade
{{ Statamic::modify($my_date_field)->iso_format('JJJJ') }}
5.x: Thursday, March 6, 2025 10:00 PM {{-- [tl! --] --}}
6.x: Friday, March 7, 2025 3:00 AM {{-- [tl! ++] --}}
```
::

It's best practice to keep dates as UTC until you're ready to display them, which means modifiers will deal with UTC versions. But, you can opt into automatic conversion to your display timezone by changing the following in `config/statamic/system.php`:

```php
'localize_dates_in_modifiers' => true, // [tl! ++] 
```

This settings _should_ have been automatically set to `true` by Statamic during the upgrade, but you should confirm it.

#### Control Panel
Dates in the Control Panel are now localized to the user's operating system timezone, rather than the application timezone.

For example, on Statamic 5, if you were in a different timezone to what your app was configured in, and you select a date from the date picker, that date would be treated as the date for the app's timezone. Not your timezone.

This was a common cause of confusion, which was one of the main reasons for all these changes.

Now in Statamic 6, the date you pick will be the date in **your** timezone.

There is nothing for you to change except your expectations when working with dates, and instructing your clients about it. 

#### REST API & GraphQL
Dates will now be returned by Statamic's REST API and GraphQL API in UTC, allowing you to localize them as needed on your frontend.

#### Changing your app timezone
It's best practice to set your app's timezone to UTC. However, changing the timezone in an existing project is a big undertaking and could mean lots of content and dates need to be updated.

Statamic 6 **does not** require that you change your timezone to UTC. But if you *want* to, we have provided a way to automate it.

[Read how to change your timezone to UTC](/tips/change-timezone-to-utc).

## Medium impact changes

### Carbon 3

Support for [Carbon 2.x](https://carbon.nesbot.com/docs/) has been removed. All Statamic 6 sites now require [Carbon 3.x](https://carbon.nesbot.com/docs/#api-carbon-3).

If you're using any of Statamic's `months_ago`, `weeks_ago`, `days_ago`, `hours_ago`, `minutes_ago`, and `seconds_ago` modifiers, you will notice that they now return floats instead of integers. Comparing against past timestamps will also result in negative numbers.

You _may_ need to updates your templates to account for these changes.

### Globals

We have made various changes to how globals are stored and localized. If you use globals in your app, please read through these changes and take any necessary action.

#### Single site installs: Variables are now stored separately from the global set config
Global Variables are now stored separately from the global set's config, allowing config and content to be properly separated.

Instead of living under a `data` key in the global set's YAML file, they now live in a separate YAML file in a directory named after your default site, usually called `default`.

**Before:**
```yaml
# content/globals/seo.yaml

title: SEO
data:
  meta_description: Synthwave nostalgia with soaring sax and heartfelt vibes.
  meta_image: the-midnight.jpg
```

**After:**
```yaml
# content/globals/seo.yaml

title: SEO
```

```yaml
# content/globals/default/seo.yaml

meta_description: Synthwave nostalgia with soaring sax and heartfelt vibes.
meta_image: the-midnight.jpg
```

_This change may have been performed automatically by Statamic during the upgrade process._

**Note:** This change _doesn't_ affect multi-sites or sites storing global variables in the database, since they're already stored separately.

#### Multi-sites: Localized sites are now determined by the `sites` array
Previously, when you configured the sites a global set was localized into, it created the global variable files for you, then used the existence of those files to determine which sites the global set was localized into.

Now, Statamic will use the `sites` array in the global set's config file to determine which sites the global set is localized into, as well as mapping the origins for localizations.

```yaml
# content/globals/seo.yaml

title: SEO
sites:
  en: null
  fr: en # Localized from en
  de: null # No origin
```

_This change may have been performed automatically by Statamic during the upgrade process._

**Note:** This change _doesn't_ affect single-site installs.

#### Events
Previously, when saving global variables in the Control Panel, the entire global set would have been saved, causing the `GlobalSetSaving`, `GlobalSetCreated` and `GlobalSetSaved` events to be dispatched. However, now, only the global variable _itself_ will be saved.

This means that if you were listening to any of these events to pick up changes to global variables, you should instead listen for the [`GlobalVariablesSaving`](https://statamic.dev.test/extending/events#globalvariablessaving), [`GlobalVariablesCreated`](https://statamic.dev.test/extending/events#globalvariablescreated) and [`GlobalVariablesSaved`](https://statamic.dev.test/extending/events#globalvariablessaved) events.

#### Removed methods on `GlobalSet` class
The `addLocalization` and `removeLocalization` methods have been removed from the `GlobalSet` class. 

If you were calling these methods in your app, you should update your code to call `save` and `delete` on the `Variables` class instead.

```php
$globalSet->addLocalization($globalSet->makeLocalization('en')->data(['foo' => 'bar'])); // [tl! remove]
$globalSet->removeLocalization('en'); // [tl! remove]

$globalSet->in('en')->data(['foo' => 'bar'])->save(); // [tl! add]
$globalSet->in('en')->delete(); // [tl! add]
```

## Low impact changes

### Added columns to the `users` table
**Affects apps storing users in the database.**
If you're storing users in the database, you will need to add three columns to the `users` table in order to support Statamic's [two-factor authentication feature](/users#two-factor-authentication). You can add the columns using a migration:

```php
<?php  
  
use Illuminate\Database\Migrations\Migration;  
use Illuminate\Database\Schema\Blueprint;  
use Illuminate\Support\Facades\Schema;  
  
return new class extends Migration  
{  
    /**  
     * Run the migrations.     
     */    
    public function up(): void  
    {  
        Schema::table('users', function (Blueprint $table) {  
            $table->text('two_factor_secret')->nullable();  
            $table->text('two_factor_recovery_codes')->nullable();  
            $table->timestamp('two_factor_confirmed_at')->nullable();  
        });  
    }  
  
    /**  
     * Reverse the migrations.     
     */    
    public function down(): void  
    {  
        Schema::table('users', function (Blueprint $table) {  
            $table->dropColumn(['two_factor_secret', 'two_factor_recovery_codes', 'two_factor_confirmed_at']);  
        });  
    }
};
```

You can run the migration by running `php artisan migrate`.

You should also add a cast for the `two_factor_confirmed_at` column in your `User` model:

```php
protected function casts(): array  
{  
    return [  
        'email_verified_at' => 'datetime',  
        'preferences' => 'json',  
        'two_factor_confirmed_at' => 'datetime',  // [tl! add]
    ];  
}
```

_This change may have been performed automatically by Statamic during the upgrade process._

### Moment.js has been removed
**Affects addons and custom code directly using moment.js**
If you are using moment.js you should replace it with an alternative. We suggest using native JS code which should be enough these days. For example:

```js
moment().seconds(); // [tl! --]
new Date().getSeconds(); // [tl! ++]
```

You should search for `moment` or `$moment` references in your code and replace appropriately.

[Here is a good resource](https://github.com/you-dont-need/You-Dont-Need-Momentjs) on how to migrate away from Moment.js.

### Wildcard tags
**Affects apps using the `{{ session }}`, `{{ cookie }}`, `{{ nav }}` and `{{ redirect }}` tags.**

In previous versions of Statamic, these tags accepted a wildcard value, allowing you to pass a handle or key directly:

```antlers
{{ session:foo }}
```

Here, `foo` is the wildcard value. However, if a variable named foo existed in the template’s context, its value would be used instead of the literal string `"foo"`, potentially causing unintended behaviour.

In Statamic 6, wildcard values are always treated as literal strings. If you need to pass a variable dynamically, you should use the appropriate parameter instead:

```antlers
{{ session :handle="foo" }}
```

This ensures that `foo` is interpreted as a variable rather than a fixed string.

### Site methods
**Affects addons using the `Site::setConfig()` method.**

The `Site::setConfig()` method was deprecated in Statamic 5. It has now been removed. You should use the `Site::setSites()` method instead:

```php
Site::setConfig([ // [tl! remove:5]
    'sites' => [
        'english' => ['name' => 'English', 'locale' => 'en_US', 'url' => '/en'],
        'french' => ['name' => 'French', 'locale' => 'fr_FR', 'url' => '/fr'],
    ],
]);

Site::setSites([ // [tl! add:3]
    'english' => ['name' => 'English', 'locale' => 'en_US', 'url' => '/en'],
    'french' => ['name' => 'French', 'locale' => 'fr_FR', 'url' => '/fr'],
]);
```

### CP Nav Items: `->active()` method removed
**Affects apps or addons adding nav items to the Control Panel.**

When adding nav items to the Control Panel, it was previously possible to specify a regex pattern used to determine if the nav item was active. However, after some improvements in Statamic, this method is no longer needed and has been removed after a deprecation period. You can safely remove it from your nav items:

```php
Nav::extend(function ($nav) {
    $nav->create(ucfirst($type))
        ->section('SEO')
        ->route("ecommerce.orders.index")
        ->active("ecommerce/orders") // [tl! --]
        ->icon($defaults->first()['type_icon']);
});
```

### Relate tag has been removed

The `relate` tag left over from Statamic 2 has been removed. You can safely remove it and rely on [augmentation](/augmentation) instead.

```antlers
{{ relate:products }} {{# [tl! remove:2] #}}
    {{ title }} 
{{ /relate:products }}

{{ products }} {{# [tl! add:2] #}}
    {{ title }}
{{ /products }}
```

## Zero impact changes

...

