---
id: 2efde67f-35b2-40fd-b54b-b53fb84e7c3a
blueprint: seo_pro
title: 'Content Linking FAQ and Troubleshooting'
nav_title: FAQs/Troubleshooting
intro: 'Answers to common questions and troubleshooting tips.'
---
## What are the *minimum* steps to setup Content Linking?

After installing SEO Pro, the following are the minimum steps:

1. Ensure a `default` database connection has been configured
2. Publish and run SEO Pro's database migrations
3. Add an OpenAI API key to the `.env` by adding the `SEO_PRO_OPENAI_API_KEY=<API_KEY>` entry
4. Enable Content Linking by adding `SEO_PRO_LINKING_ENABLED=true` to the `.env` file
5. Run the `php please seo-pro:analyze-content` command from the root of the project

While this is the *fastest* way to get started, you may want to review the documentation for [disabling collections first](/seo-pro/collection-configuration).

## Can I use Content Linking features *without* AI embeddings or OpenAI?

The content linking features cannot be used without generating embeddings from entry content.

Any OpenAI compatible embeddings API may be used. SEO Pro does not have a hard dependency on OpenAI, specifically.

## Why are manual changes to flat-file entries not reflected in the Link Manager?

Some information is cached within the `seopro_entry_links` database table for performance reasons. Entry titles and URIs can be synchronized by running the following command from the root of the project:

```bash
php please seo-pro:sync-entry-links
```

This command will also delete rows from the `seopro_entry_links` table if the entry no longer exists.

## How do I exclude a specific entry from being suggested?

To exclude a specific entry from being suggested, follow the [steps outlined here](/seo-pro/entry-configuration#preventing-the-entry-from-being-suggested).

## Some collections are not appearing in suggested results

Collections not appearing in results can be caused by a variety of things:

* The collections are listed in the `statamic.seo-pro.linking.disabled_collections` configuration option within the `config/statamic/seo-pro.php` configuration file
* The collections are not listed in any other collection's "Limit Suggestions From" configuration
* The current user does not have permissions to view entries from the collections that are not appearing
* The collection was added after initially setting up SEO Pro content linking features and keywords, link metadata, or embeddings have not been generated for that collection yet

## The site's name, branding, or other repeatedly used phrased are appearing too often in suggestions.

Phrases that are appear frequently within content, but provide no real value in terms of linking opportunities, should be added to each site's "Ignored Phrases" list. This list is added to the keyword and phrases "stop word" list.

Updates to a site's ignored phrases list *are applied* when returning suggestions for specific entries. Because of this, the `seopro_entry_keywords` table does *not* need to be regenerated after making changes.

## No entries are appearing in the Link Manager

Entries not appearing within the Link Manager is most often caused by an empty `seopro_entry_links` database table. The simplest way to resolve this is by running the following command from the root of the project:

```bash
php please seo-pro:analyze-content
```

The `seo-pro:analyze-content` command will work to regenerate keywords, embeddings, and link meta data for all missing entries, or if the content has changed. If you'd like to target the `seopro_entry_links` table specifically, you may run the following command instead:

```bash
php please seo-pro:scan-link
```

## Entries are present in the Link Manager, but no suggestions are appearing

The most common reason for no suggestions appearing is missing embeddings or keyword data. This can be regenerated by running the following command from the root of the project:

```bash
php please seo-pro:analyze-content
```

If both tables are already populated, and suggestions are still not appearing for an entry, this may be caused by any of the following:

* There are missing values in the `seopro_entry_links` database table. Run `php please seo-pro:scan-links` to resolve this.
* No more suggestions could be found within the keyword or related entry threshold limits. If a link already appears within the content, that entry will *not* be suggested again.
* It is possible the content crawler is unable to find any content to parse. If pages do not contain `<article></article>` tags, a developer will need to use the `{{ seo_pro:content }}{{ /seo_pro:content }}` tag pair to mark the content to be parsed and analyzed.
* A network or database related issue could be interfering with generating suggestions. This is possible on very large sites; adjusting which collections an entry can receive suggestions from may help if this is the case.

## I have a custom fieldtype and links are not automatically inserted into nested fields.

Content linking and automatic link insertion relies on an internal concept of "content mapping". SEO Pro utilizes this content mapping system to target specific fields and instruct the insertion/replacement engine on how to perform the content updates.

Because of the varied nature of custom fieldtypes, SEO Pro's content mapper cannot make generalizations on how the content is structured, or how to update it in a safe way. For these reasons, custom fieldtypes would require their own custom content mapper and link insertion implementation.

## Analyzing content is taking a long time.

SEO Pro must retrieve the content and interact with third-party APIs, as well as extract keywords and phrases for each entry, which can take some time. To reduce the number of entries processed, consider restricting which collections are analyzed.

## How do I customize the format of links inserted into Text, Textarea, and Markdown fieldtypes?

SEO Pro uses templates when creating the link to insert into your site's output. You can override these templates by publishing the associated views with the following command:

```bash
 php artisan vendor:publish --tag=seo-pro-linking-views
```

After the command runs, you will find three new templates within your resources directory:

* `vendor/seo-pro/links/automatic.antlers.html`: Determines the format of Global Automatic Links
* `vendor/seo-pro/links/html.antlers.html`: Determines the format of links inserted into [Text](/fieldtypes/text) and [Textarea](/fieldtypes/textarea) fieldtypes
* `vendor/seo-pro/links/markdown.antlers.html`: Determines the format of links inserted into the [Markdown](/fieldtypes/markdown) fieldtypes

Modify the template associated with the fieldtype(s) you would like to adjust the format of.

## How do I disable content mapping for a specific entry field?

You may disable content mapping for a specific entry field [by following the steps listed in this guide](/seo-pro/parsing-content-and-content-mapping#disabling-content-mapping-for-a-field).